These graphs display the models fitted to each subject's data, while
showing locations at which data was sampled. The model has three
primary variables (spacing, envelope motion, and carrier strength)
which we are concerned with; these variables can be considered to form
a three-dimensional stimulus configuration space. The combination of
these three variables determines the likelihood with which the
observer will respond "clockwise" or "counterclockwise" to the given
stimulus. Here we show the model's predictions over four planar
sections through this three-dimensional space.

The upper figure (what I'm referring to as upper and lower shows up in
the PDF on consecutive pages) shows model responses and observations
over four sections. From upper right counterclockwise, we show how (a)
model responses vary as a function of spacing and carrier strength,
for stimuli with zero envelope motion, (b) as a function of spacing
and envelope movement, for stimuli with zero carrier motion, (c) as a
function of envelope motion and carrier strength, for stimuli with a
fixed, narrow spacing, and (d) as a function of envelope motion and
carrier strength (similarly to (c)), for stimuli with a fixed, wide
spacing.

Each panel in the upper figure shows the model's predictions as a
function of two of the three variables, leaving the other fixed; the
value of the fixed variable is noted in the upper right corner of each
panel. The shading represents the model's estimated probability of
responding "clockwise" for that stimulus, with white representing a
probability of 1 and black representing a probability of zero. Dotted
contour lines are drawn at probabilities of 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, and
0.9.

In the lower figure the four planar sections shown in the upper plot
are replotted in perspective, showing the relation between the
sections and their relation to the space of stimulus
configurations. Shading and contour lines are as in the upper figure.

The upper figure also depicts the observer's responses. Circles
plotted are drawn from subjects' responses, with their shading
determined by the subject's response. Because a staircase procedure
was used to select values of envelope motion, different numbers of
trials were collected at each stimulus condition and a large number of
stimulus conditions were used. For this graph we sort the set of
stimulus conditions into regularly spaced bins, each represented here
by a circle. The area of each circle is scaled in proportion to the
number of trials collected in its bin.

Trials collected in one bin may take any value in the unseen
dimension. For example, in the upper left panel, each circle
represents a bin collecting trials in a small range of spacing and
carrier strength, but across the entire range of envelope motion. The
two panels on the right have the same axes, with spacing narrow for
one and wider for the other; we divide the trials up into two groups
so that circles in the upper left panel reflect trials with narrower
spacings, and circles in the upper right panel reflect wider spacings,
as indicated in the annotation at the upper right of each panel. For
the other two plots, each circle represents a bin collecting stimuli
over the entire range of the missing variable.

The shading of the circle reflects an average of the observers'
responses falling within the bin; if the model fits exactly, the
interior of each circle will match the exterior. Because the bin may
collect stimulus conditions that vary in their expected rates of
response, the shade of each circle is determined by the Pearson
residual of the trials against the fitted model; we choose a shade
that would give the same residual if all stimuli were located at the
center of the bin. Thus if the interior of the circle is lighter than
the background, it indicates that the observer gave more clockwise
responses than the fitted model, aggregated over all stimulus
configurations within the bin. (This amounts to a weighted average
over the observer's responses in each bin.)
