#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Standard
Even though the motion of all targets is identical and in principle information
 might be accumulated over all targets, the sensitivity to envelope motion
 with 4 targets is the same as sensitivity with 2 targets.'
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
'
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This region may be identified with the resolution of spatial attention,
 the critical distance of crowding, or some under characteristic size associated
 with higher-order motion detection.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In other words, the model assumes that even though the subjects were asked
 to report the direction of motion of the entire stimulus, when performing
 this task there is no increase in sensitivity due to pooling.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When targets are packed closely together, these estimates of position become
 less reliable, or in other words 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

spread out
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 over a larger area; but at the same time neighboring targets are more available.
 If the visual system is comparing successive estimates of position, then,
 there is the possibility of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

misbinding,
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or associating one target's previous position with a flanker's current
 position.
 How can the visual system cope with cluttered environments while tracking
 objects, then? It appears that when position estimates are less reliable
 the estimate of position change is augmented by first-order motion signals.
 When targets are uncrowded, the perception appears to be dominated by the
 higher-order motion; as clutter increases, the visual system will be proportion
ately more influenced by the local motion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At a less prosaic and more mechanistic level, several lines of evidence
 
\begin_inset Marginal
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
cites?
\end_layout

\end_inset

 suggest that flankers exert an influence over targets that is like 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

obligatory summation
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 clockwise tilted flankers bias orientation judgements clockwise, and so
 on.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We might identify this process with optic flow mechanisms, with the idea
 that coherent large-scale motion over the entire visual scene is most likely
 to arise from motions of the observer rather than motions of objects in
 the scene.
 When judging the motion of a selected target, it would usually be prudent
 to discount the background motion.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
