#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass apa
\use_default_options true
\master manuscript.lyx
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Section
General Methods
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Observers
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Observers were one of the authors (P.B.M.) and three naïve subjects (J.A., D.A.,
 and X.X.).
 All had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Equipment
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Stimuli were presented on a flat CRT video monitor (ViewSonic PF790; 
\begin_inset Formula $800\times600$
\end_inset

; display area 
\begin_inset Formula $341\times256$
\end_inset

 mm; 120Hz refresh rate) Experiments were programmed in MATLAB using the
 Psychtoolbox 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Brainard:1997gq"

\end_inset

 and Eyelink toolbox extensions 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Cornelissen:2002wl"

\end_inset

, along with custom OpenGL code.
 The monitor was calibrated using a Tektronix photometer.
 A minimum luminance patch shown against the surrounding background measured
 $
\begin_inset Formula $0.10\textrm{\frac{cd}{m^{2}}}$
\end_inset

, and a maximum luminance patch measured 
\begin_inset Formula $66.05\mathrm{\frac{cd}{m^{2}}}$
\end_inset

.
 The background luminance was chosen to lie at the midpoint of these values
 and a hardware lookup table was constructed to linearize the display response.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Subjects sat behind a blackout curtain so that ambient illumination was
 mostly due to the monitor and viewed the screen binocularly using a chin
 and forehead rest with the eyes 60 cm from the screen.
 Eye position was monitored using a video-based eye tracker (EyeLink 1000;
 SR Research) using a sample rate of 1000 Hz.
 Eye movements were recorded but are not reported in this paper.
 Subjects gave responses by turning a knob (PowerMate; Griffin Technologies)
 with their preferred hand.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Stimuli
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Example stimuli are shown in 
\backslash
autoref{mov:stimuli} and are illustrated in an $(x, t)$ plot in 
\backslash
autoref{fig:stimuli} ($x$ here being a slice around a circle centered on
 the fixation point and passing through the center of each motion element.)
 The stimuli consisted of discrete local motion elements presented at regular
 temporal and spatial intervals as in apparent motion.
 Each local motion element had a luminance profile along the circle given
 by a Cauchy filter function 
\backslash
citep{Klein:1985rz} with peak spatial frequency $f$.
 The luminance profile shifts phase with a constant temporal frequency $
\backslash
omega$ and is temporally modulated by a Gaussian envelope with standard
 deviation $d/2$.
 In the radial direction, each local motion element had a Gaussian envelope
 with standard deviation $w/2$.
 The equation describing the luminance profile of a patch as a function
 of position and time is then: 
\backslash
begin{equation*} C(x, y, t) = 
\backslash
mathrm{cos}^n(
\backslash
mathrm{tan}^{-1}(fx/n))
\backslash
mathrm{cos}(n 
\backslash
cdot 
\backslash
mathrm{tan}^{-1}(fx/n) + {
\backslash
omega}t) e^{-(t/2d)^2-(y/2d)^2} 
\backslash
end{equation*} with the direction of motion along $x$.
 
\backslash
todo{Is the equation totally necessary? Is the use of x,y to describe a
 circular stimulus confusing here?} The spatial bandwidth parameter $n$
 was set to 4 for all stimuli.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset listings
inline false
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
begin{movie}   
\backslash
includemovie[poster,text={
\backslash
small(Movie: three example stimuli)}]{4in}{4in}{demo_stimuli.mov}   
\backslash
caption{Three example stimuli.
 Subjects viewed stimuli such as these and were asked to judge the direction
 ofmovement of the elements (here clockwise in all cases) regardless of
 the direction of local motion (clockwise, neutral counterphase, or counterclock
wise)}   
\backslash
label{mov:stimuli} 
\backslash
end{movie}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In each trial, a number of identical elements were arranged in a circle
 around the fixation point, each oriented with the direction of motion tangentia
l to the circle.
 Each element was presented repeatedly at intervals of ${
\backslash
Delta}t$, each successive appearance displaced a fixed distance ${
\backslash
Delta}x$ around the circle.
 The examples in 
\backslash
autoref{mov:stimuli} have the following settings, the same as used in Experiment
 1 
\backslash
todo{Double check these figures}: ${
\backslash
Delta}t = 100$ ms, $
\backslash
omega = 10$ cyc/s, $d$ = 0.033 s, and if $
\backslash
phi$ denotes eccentricity, then $f = 8.9 cyc/
\backslash
phi$, ${
\backslash
Delta}x = 0.05 
\backslash
cdot 
\backslash
phi$, and $w = 0.066 
\backslash
cdot 
\backslash
phi$.
 The contrast of the local motion elements was 100
\backslash
% for trials using counterphase stimuli, and $70.7
\backslash
%$ for other trials (so as to keep the motion-energy of the display constant.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For Experiments 1, 2, and 3, subjects were required to respond within a
 fixed temporal window.
 If the latency from motion onset to response was outside the window, the
 fixation point changed color (red for late responses, blue for early responses)
 for 1 second as feedback and the trial was reshuffled into the stimulus
 set to be repeated later in the session.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Subjects performed the task in sessions of at most 1 hour, divided into
 4 or 5 blocks of 150 to 200 trials each, and were prompted to take a break
 between blocks.
 Subjects could also rest at any point by simply delaying fixation.
 At the beginning of each block, the eye tracking system was automatically
 recalibrated by asking the subject to make saccades to a sequence of targets
 at randomly chosen locations on the screen.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For all experiments reported here, three stimulus types were used with equal
 probability.
 In one third of trials the direction of local motion was congruent with
 that of global motion.
 In the second third, the direction of local motion was opposite to the
 direction of global motion.
 In the remaining trials, elements with counterphase local motion were used.
 Counterphase elements were constructed by superposing two local motion
 elements with equal and opposite directions of local motion.; i.e.
 the counterphase stimuli have the same spatial and temporal frequency content
 as the congruent and incongruent elements, but their motion energy is equivocal
 between opposite directions.
 The second stimulus in 
\backslash
autoref{mov:stimuli} shows counterphase local motion.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
