#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Standard
I have a puzzle.
 CF appears to be an alert, well-performing subject, but doesn't deem to
 be subject to the crowding effect at all.
 Weirdly, his responses to coherent motion contain a high number of errors
 -- in fact, almost as many errors as he makes on counterphase AND incongruent
 motion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It may be that this reflects 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

second guessing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 on the part of CF.
 Many of the errors he makes in coherent motion are at longer response times,
 as shown in this plot:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But CF cas been instructed to 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I have been wondering about how to make this experiment more precisely analagous
 to what happens inteh crowding literature.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It may be that subjects vary in the degree that they are sensitive to different
 features of the stimulus, such as local direction.
 Actually this is not the first time I have seen a subject who did not do
 well at the local 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Therefore, I constructed an experiment to get at the discrimination thresholds
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Methods
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In half of the trials, we presented counterphase motion elements, whose
 long-range motion displacement varied according to the.
 The amount of displacement 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In a parallel and randomly interleaved set of trials, we presented stimuli
 that 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Objection.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It isn't clear that the discrimination threshold for change in position
 of a counterphase-flickering object is the same as the discrimination threshold
 related to the change in position of an incongruently-moving object.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
